In this emergency episode, we are
discussing the US government shutting
down anthropics fable 5. The AI Daily
Brief is a daily podcast and video about
the most important news and discussions
in AI. Hello friends, welcome back to
the AI Daily Brief. For the first time
in the 3-year history of this show, news
has broken on a Friday afternoon that is
too significant to wait until Monday to
explore. Last night, just before 9
Eastern time in the US, Anthropic
tweeted, "The US government, citing
national security authorities has issued
an export control directive to suspend
all access to Fable 5 and Mythos 5 by
any foreign national, whether inside or
outside the United States, including
foreign national anthropic employees.
The net effect of this order is that we
must abruptly disable Fable 5 and Mythos
5 for all our customers to ensure
compliance. Access to all other cloud
models is not affected. We apologize for
this disruption to our customers. We
believe this is a misunderstanding and
are working to restore access as soon as
possible. After this absolutely stunning
news, journalists and internet sleuths
flew into a tizzy to try to figure out
what the heck had actually just
happened. The Wall Street Journal added
some color, reporting that commerce
secretary Howard Lutnik had sent a
letter to Anthropic CEO Dario Amade
announcing that the new models Fable 5
and Mythos 5 were now subject to export
restrictions. meaning usage by customers
outside the US as well as foreign
nationals within the US would be
prohibited. So where did this seemingly
capriccious policy come from? It was
apparently a report from another company
about a jailbreak it had discovered.
Enthropic gave more details in their
blog post writing, "We received the
directive from the government today at
5:21 p.m. The letter did not provide
specific details of its national
security concern. Our understanding is
that the government believes that it has
become aware of a method of bypassing or
jailbreaking Fable 5. We reviewed a
demonstration of this specific technique
being used to identify a small number of
previously known minor vulnerabilities.
These vulnerabilities all appear
relatively simple and we have found that
other publicly available methods are
able to discover them as well without
requiring a bypass. And basically from
there went on to say that they just
don't buy the US's logic. They point out
that in the weeks leading up to the
release of Fable, they worked with the
US government and many others to red
team Fable safeguards for a significant
amount of time. They pointed out that
quote, "No testers have yet been able to
find a universal jailbreak, a jailbreak
method that can very broadly bypass the
model safeguards." Indeed, they write,
"We suspect that perfect jailbreak
resistance is not currently possible for
any model provider. Every safeguard used
in the industry is vulnerable to
non-universal jailbreaks, which can
elicit some cyber information in
specific circumstances, and it is likely
that universal jailbreaks will
eventually be found in the future." They
said, "Given that perfect jailbreak
resistance does not appear to be
possible today, Anthropic adopted a
defense in-depth strategy with Fable 5.
We aimed to make jailbreaks either
narrow or very expensive to produce and
to combine this with thorough monitoring
to quickly detect and shut down any
successful attacks. Hearkening back to
the controversy of this week, they
continue this is also why Anthropic has
required 30-day retention of customer
data with Fable, a policy change that
carries real costs for us with
customers, but that allows us to
research and mitigate jailbreaks.
Importantly, they conclude, "We have not
even received a disclosure of a
concerning non-universal potential
jailbreak that led to a harmful result.
The potential jailbreaks that have been
disclosed to us are either entirely
benign responses or are minor findings
that provide no mythos specific uplift."
To date, they write, "The government has
only given us verbal evidence of a
potential narrow non-universal
jailbreak, which essentially consists of
asking the model to read a specific
codebase and fix any software flaws. Our
understanding is that one potential
jailbreak was shared with the
government. We have reviewed a report
that we believe is the basis of the
government's directive and validated
that the level of capability displayed
there is widely available from other
models including OpenAI's GPT 5.5 and is
used every day by the defenders who keep
systems safe. Given that then they
write, "We are complying with the
government's legal directive and are
removing access to Fable 5 and Mythos 5
for all users. However, we disagree that
the finding of a narrow potential
jailbreak should be caused for recalling
a commercial model deployed to hundreds
of millions of people. If this standard
was applied across the industry, we
believe it would essentially halt all
new model deployments for all Frontier
model providers. Now, the Wall Street
Journal later added, "The jailbreak
research in question was done by
researchers at Amazon who used a series
of prompts to get anthropics models to
provide them with information about a
handful of security vulnerabilities."
Now, one note, as people will clarify,
is that although the Wall Street Journal
reported that the research was done by
Amazon, the journal did not report that
it was Amazon who shared the findings
with the US government. Nick on X
writes, "Project Glasswing's whole
purpose is to literally do security
tests to find vulnerabilities and share
findings. Amazon is a glasswing partner
and anthropic investor, so why would
they file a federal complaint?" Now,
Prince onx put together a bunch of
different posts to try to put together
something of a timeline of what
happened. They argued that contrary to
Anthropic's argument that every
safeguard used in the industry is
vulnerable to non-universal jailbreaks
and they stated that clearly when they
released Fable 5, quote, "My best guess
is that the US government did not fully
realize this at the time when the
release of Fable 5 was approved." Now,
Prince added that per Axios, the
government contacted Anthropic to ask to
pause releasing the models, but was
unsuccessful, or as they put it,
Anthropic told the government to pound
sand. Now, it's hard to wrap our heads
around just how consequential this is.
Risha Chararma was one of many to point
out that a huge number of Anthropics
technical staff, including no less than
Andre Carpathy, are not US citizens, but
instead here on things like EB1 visas,
meaning that even internally, they are
not allowed to interact with these
models now. So, where we sit, at least
at 7:32 a.m. Eastern time on Saturday
morning, is that Fable and Mythos are
not available to anyone right now. And
you got to think that there is a flurry
of behind-the-scenes activity trying to
resolve this as fast as humanly
possible. So, what does the chattering
class think? Dan Robustas on X teed up
pretty much the entire conversation when
he wrote, "Am I mad at anthropic or the
US government?" Both? Probably both.
Yeah, it's both. So, let's talk first
about the US government side or
specifically the what the hell are you
doing US government side? Many pointed
out that the specific pretext for this
banning is incredibly loose. AI
entrepreneur Bindu ready wrote this is
really stupid. The US banned Fable just
because it responded with information
that is already freely available on the
internet. Every other model can easily
be made to respond to some silly
questions about common security
vulnerabilities or how to make drugs or
whatever. The cluelessness of the
government is astounding. In the Wall
Street Journal, the CEO of cyber
security firm Letter Security, Katy
Mures, wrote, "Who at the White House
evaluated this and thought it was a
threat? It's a complete overreaction
because this is exactly the kind of
prompting that defenders would do." AI
policy expert Dean Ball wrote, "I can't
tell if this is lawfare against
anthropic in particular or extreme
national security hawkery. Regardless,
it's simply cartoonish." Council on
Foreign Relations senior fellow Chris
Magcguire wrote, "If the Trump
administration is so concerned about
access to advanced AI models, why is it
not enforcing the export controls
currently on the books on advanced AI
models or the export controls that would
require a license to buy large numbers
of AI chips to make these models?" Now
to be clear about Chris's position, he
later tweeted, "I actually think
targeted export controls on model access
are prudent, but across the board
controls on all countries on a single
model without any warning is highly
questionable. Export controls are a
critical tool and an extremely powerful
one. Used correctly, they have the
potential to massively extend the US
lead in AI. Used incorrectly, they will
stifle AI development. The Department of
Commerce's export control strategy has
been completely incoherent and
sabotaging. It is sending powerful AI
chips to China, not enforcing controls
that would prevent Chinese smuggling,
creating massive loopholes that allow AI
chips to be sent to China, and
preventing US AI companies from
releasing their own models. This has to
stop. We urgently need a smart export
control strategy that applies robust
export controls to deny our adversaries
access to advanced technology while
advantaging US companies. Commerce and
BIS are consistently doing the opposite.
If BIS doesn't understand how to use its
authorities or what the implications are
of its actions, then it needs to find
some new personnel who can actually
execute a competent export control
strategy. The current one is incoherent
and self-defeating. Many pointed out
that it was also hypocritical. Emerson
Brooking from the Atlantic Council
reshared a post from the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy
from just a couple of weeks ago when
they bit back at the New York Times
after the NT reported that President
Trump had signed an executive order
asking tech companies to give the
government oversight of new AI models
before releasing them to the public. At
the time, the White House account wrote,
"Lazy and inaccurate reporting on this
policy. The EO creates a process for
Frontier Labs to voluntarily share
cutting edge cyber models in order to
secure critical infrastructure and
strengthen the government's own cyber
defenses. We are not conducting
oversight of all new models. And here's
the money quote as that level of
government overreach would have chilling
effects on free speech and innovation.
Indeed, the policy seems so baffling.
For example, as Dean Ball again put it,
an administration whose posture is that
we should export advanced AI chips to
China, which also wants to ban Britain
and every other non-American on Earth
from using our best models. I have no
words. Yes, to many, the policy is so
baffling that it feels distinctly
personal. Precaging the next point we'll
get into, Josh Pigford wrote, "Anthropic
has not done themselves any favors with
their hyperbole over the past 6 to 12
months, but I also guarantee this has
zero to do with national security." Now
adding evidence to that is when the
Department of War CIO Kirsten Davies
tweeted, "We fully support POTUS and the
Secretary of War in prioritizing
national security and the security of
our war fighters, DIIB partners,
critical infrastructure, international
partners, and allies. Some things are
simply more important than revenue
cycles, clickbait, and preipo
valuation." Now, I don't know who
approved that tweet, and it could just
be Davey's opinion, but that level of
animosity specifically targeted at
Anthropic makes it seem like this has
pretty much nothing to do with Fable 5
and everything to do with the
relationship between Anthropic and the
government. Well-known tech journalist
Ashley Vance writes, "This strikes me as
so petty and dumb on the government's
part. They want Anthropic to do their
bidding and are willing to hold the
whole country back as a result."
Georgetown Laws Peter Herrell is pissed.
I find it ridiculous, he writes, and
unamerican for the government to tell me
as an American I cannot use an advanced
AI model because of a vague and
non-public alleged security threat. We
should regulate AI, but based on
transparent and impartial rules and not
5 p.m. on a Friday dictats. Joey
Palitano writes, "All of the worst
impulses of the Trump presidency on full
display. No plan or strategy, everything
reactive, arbitrary, and maximally
invasive. Anthropic is just repeatedly
being singled out because they have
insufficiently bent the knee. Putting it
even more dramatically, Lasanex writes,
"Trump really wants to kill both OpenAI
and Anthropic, nationalize their tech,
and then become the emperor of mankind."
Now, as much animosity as there is
towards the US government, frankly, most
of the industry's scorn right now is
being levied on Anthropic itself. AI
builder Sarah Hooker writes, "You have
to be humble even when pursuing
excellence. I think the arrogance with
which Anthropic has pursued the latest
release has universally landed poorly.
It is presumed everyone else should just
be grateful to touch the technology even
if it is intentionally hobbled and no
one else should be given permission to
develop the technology because it is too
dangerous. Jeremy Howard, who's no
hyperbolic exposter hater, wrote, "I
disagree with this decision and I don't
like it, but also how did Anthropic not
see this coming? It is the obvious
response to this is too dangerous for
anyone except us to use since that
relies on a premise we are uniquely good
that almost no one agrees with. Daria
Anutmas who has spent the last few days
not being able to use Fable 5 because it
knows that he is a biomedical researcher
wrote happy now Dario Amade you got your
wish for government regulation after
constant fear-mongering to slow AI
progress. Entropic has done tremendous
damage to AI advancement. They succeeded
in realizing this nightmare scenario. It
is a sad and grave day for America and
humanity. Now, summing up the sentiment
behind this was a three- panel cartoon
that went viral. In the first panel, a
concerned looking Dario Amade says,
"This is the most dangerous AI yet. It
could kill us all. It will destroy all
global infrastructure. This can't be
allowed to fall into the wrong hands."
In the middle panel, Donald Trump says,
"Okay, it's banned." And in the third
and final panel, an apoplelectic Dario
says, "You can't do this." Investor
entrepreneur and writer Will Manitus was
one of about a bajillion people to point
back to an old quote from a recent
anthropic blog post that said the
government should have the power to
block or deter deployment of the model
if it is determined in light of third
party assessment to present unacceptable
risks. Will points out Dario 48 hours
ago US government should be able to
block model deployment. US government
export controls models. Daario says not
like that. Now, some trying to point out
that Anthropic did actually try to
address this in their blog post, saying,
"As we have stated publicly, we believe
the government should have the ability
to block unsafe deployments as part of a
statutory process that is transparent,
fair, clear, and grounded in technical
facts. This action does not adhere to
those principles." Still, even with that
caveat, a whole lot of people felt like
this was an faround, find out kind of
moment for Anthropic. Investor Nick
Carter wrote, "I can't believe Anthropic
comparing their product to nuclear
weapons 800 times backfired on them. I
am shocked. Author Tay Kim writes, "So
livid right now. Anthropic, overhyped
mythos scared the living daylights out
of the clueless global politicians like
Treasury Secretary Bessant and ECB
President Christine Lagard and stoked a
regulatory panic that may set back the
entire AI industry." Expressing the same
sentiment but with a slightly more
dispassionate voice, entrepreneur John
Enis wrote, "My opinion is that Mythos
is the current best model, but not
actually some world-changing dangerous
model, and that Anthropic did their
usual song and dance about safety,
largely because they didn't have enough
compute to serve it at scale." So then
they launched Fable because they still
have to think about the IPO, but they
are still somewhat computed, so they put
all sorts of restrictions on it. around
the same time because they were trying
to get regulatory capture and not
because things are actually dangerous.
Daario did more scaremongering and
published his honestly confusing white
paper that offered no real solutions. So
finally they succeeded. They managed to
freak out the government. Their cynical
plan backfired and now it's a giant pain
in the butt. Or as Bante simply put it,
they named it Fable and then acted
surprised when it came with a moral. Now
one thing that I will note is that to
their credit, the safety are not dancing
around excitedly. Eleazar Yudkowski, who
I disagree with pretty vehemently most
of the time, wrote, "I can't tell today
whether this ends up good or bad.
International treaties to stop all
further AI escalation would be a
definite good." Things short of that
complicated. This has some bad aspects
like selectivity and likely overrule.
And good aspects like pushing against
the psychology of but no government
would ever dare tell AI companies to do
anything so give up or raising doubts
that impede venture funding for ever
bigger models. So please stop tweeting
about how I must be celebrating this.
I'm not one of the kids who immediately
goes into overactive victory peroxisms
about any hit on a perceived enemy. I
care about the effect on where things
end up a year later. And that's a little
harder to know the first day, you know.
And in fact, trying to figure out where
this leads days, weeks, months, or years
from now was where a lot of the
conversation resolved. Aaron Levy
stating almost the obvious bluntly
writes, "This is a big turning point for
AI regulation. The government is
starting to deem some models too
powerful for certain uses, which creates
a precedent for a range of possible
controls in the future. I'm in the camp
that this is unnecessary and we should
be primarily regulating the use of AI as
opposed to the underlying models. But
equally, there are plenty of people who
actually prefer this outcome. Either
way, it's unlikely that we're going back
to a world where the government doesn't
have far more meaningful involvement in
the rate of AI progress. Andrew Friedman
wrote, "This is a moment we'll look back
on as a major turning point in AI. For
years, people in this community have
warned that AI policy would get weird.
That these systems would grow powerful
enough to put them on a collision course
with our institutions, our economy, our
governments. I don't know what caused
this moment. I don't know what it means
for future models. I can't tell if this
is targeted specific to anthropic, but I
can't think of a more overt act of
government intervention in our
capitalist society in my lifetime. AI
policy just got weird. Coining a new and
I think important term, Sterling Crispen
wrote, "The worst thing about this fable
situation is that it just created
precedence for capability thought crimes
and drew a clear line in the sand going
forward. Are the next round of models
going to need DOW clearance before
release? New open source models? This is
not good for progress." Daniel Jeff
wrote, "We're seeing a speedrun of a
hideous future play out. Nobody can
build a business on this quicksand and
uncertainty. If we continue with this
wild gibbering fear-mongering and the
fear-based gated access, and if we
create the regulatory capturing policies
this insane and idiotic and incoherent
fear pushes the clueless towards, we
will absolutely guarantee that the
future of intelligence gets built
outside America. Brian Xiao writes, "If
this sticks, this means Americans will
need proof of citizenship to gain access
to models on the level of mythos. That
means potential ID verification not just
on Claude, but everywhere Fable is
served downstream. Cursor, Devon, Open
Router, etc. A law firm that uses Harvey
serving Fable 5 will get impacted just
the same. Brian also writes, "How is
anthropic supposed to serve Fable
through API billing? They will somehow
have to figure out a way to verify
citizenship of the end user. API access
will need to be drastically changed
before access even to American companies
and citizens can be restored." And of
course, researchers at Frontier Labs
themselves will no longer be able to use
their own models. Brian points out also
that OpenAI and Google DeepMind no
longer have incentives to ship anything
mythos caliber until this is resolved.
If they release it, any company that can
jailbreak the model can get export
controls imposed on the model and then
they now have to deal with the same
headaches. Plus, any non- US partners
with Mythos Access through Project
Glasswing get cut off. Now that the US
has exercised its kill switch once,
expect other countries to operate with
the assumption that Frontier Access can
and will be revoked unilaterally.
Honestly, one of the moments that I'm
reminded of in AI history was when Sam
Alman was first removed and then
reinstated as OpenAI CEO. That was the
beginning of the end of their
relationship with Microsoft. Now,
nominally, Microsoft stuck with them
with Satya Nadella playing a
behind-the-scenes role trying to get
everything sorted out. But from a sheer
fiduciary responsibility standpoint,
from that moment on, he had to start
putting up walls with OpenAI and
building resilience at Microsoft that
was outside of OpenAI's models. The
company had simply proven itself to be
too capriccious for Microsoft to trust
it. And the entire history of how
Microsoft has developed AI since has
been shaped by that one moment. Connor
Brown was one of many to point out the
comparisons to the 1990s. He wrote,
"Welcome to the AI wars. We are now
staring down the barrel of KYC and
anti-compete laundering laws for
frontier models. And this is just for
mythos. What happens when we get further
capability jumps? Will the public have
access to frontier intelligence ever
again? We fought this battle in the '90s
for free and open access to
cryptography, but it was not easy. The
fight this time around will be much
harder and the stakes will be much
higher." Now, one thing we haven't
discussed yet, which I think is hugely
important, is the impact in markets.
Machine learning street talk wrote,
"This will become a textbook example of
how a company snatched defeat from the
clause of victory. Their BS game
spectacularly backfired. You reap what
you sow." Daniel Woo writes, "How does
something like this not torpedo the AI
intelligence explosion bullcase? US
government establishing precedent that
access to anything as smart as Fable 5,
which is not RSI and nowhere near AGI,
will be banned, even if anthropic could
make the model accessible to US
nationals, how will any customer ensure
compliance seeing as not all employees
of US enterprises are US nationals? So,
we have a situation where the labs need
to spend increasing amounts of capex to
build more powerful models, but are
restricted from monetizing them. I do
not think the intelligence levels of
Opus 48 and GPT55 are enough to justify
anywhere close to the amount of AI capex
being spent, let alone projected to be
spent. And in that scary reality, one
person who potentially has a target on
their head is Anthropic CEO Dario Amade
himself. Tech commentator Robert Scobble
writes, "I can't see how Daario survives
another week. Investors in anthropic are
pissed at his leadership." Lan on X
again writes, "The realistic take on the
anthropic situation. Investing in AI
companies has just become permanently
more risky as the US government could
pull the plug at any moment. GDP on X
writes, "Ananthropic IPO has been
kneecapped. If Anthropic cannot offer
the powerful models to the rest of the
world, this reduces their global market
share by 25%. Is it then still a 1
trillion USD market cap company? Open
source is already near Opus and Sonnet
and will cross that tier soon." While I
duly respect safety concerns, this is
very broad and is akin to throwing the
baby out with the bathwater. The world
is going to be split by model access.
Land sharing the Wikipedia post for
1987's Black Monday event on Wall Street
wrote, "Trump popping the AI bubble
wasn't on my bingo card." Now, I don't
like to speculate on market reactions,
and I hope that investors can be a
little bit dispassionate, but I more or
less am of the belief that at this
point, the entire American economy kind
of rests on the relationship between
Anthropic and OpenAI's revenue
continuing to go up and investors being
willing to continue to fund the AI
buildout. I think the sheer tonnage of
damage that this move from the US
government does not just to anthropic
but to the entire US economy is hard to
overstate. Certainly everyone around the
world who is not American has to be
feeling very different about things than
they were just a day ago. VC Hemtt
Mahabra writes, "The sovereign AI is
real moment here. Nation states will
soon start needing citizenship and or
security clearances to work on their
next state-of-the-art models the way
they do for defense, space, and nuclear
tech. It's only a matter of time. Talent
wars here will be crazy. Alex Petropolis
writes, "This should be a warning shot
for all middle powers. Your access to
frontier AI systems is not guaranteed.
You need to build and pull your leverage
to secure access. A failure to do so is
a threat to your R&D, economic, and
defensive competitiveness." Gail Weiner
writes, "Up until now, the US position
against China has been, we are the rule
of law, predictable, trustworthy
provider. They are arbitrary and
politically directed. The asymmetry of
the narrative just evaporated. Any
procurement officer in Brussels, Tokyo,
or Sao Paulo who watched this happen now
has a defensible argument for sovereign
AI hedging, EU model preference, or
cautious experimentation with Chinese
openweight alternatives. The Deep Seek
and Quen quality gap is small enough
that this matters. British politician
Tom Tuganot wrote, "Disabling Fable 5
and other models for foreigners is not a
misunderstanding or a mistake. It's the
inevitable result of technology shaping
warfare so that sovereignty is more
about code than cannons. With high
energy costs and the emphasis on safety,
not opportunity, Britain's response has
been to build the break, cutting
ourselves off from the future and tied
ourselves to the past. We cannot
continue like this and remain sovereign.
The Europeans account on Twitter writes,
"The US government has ordered the
suspension of access to anthropics
frontier AI models Fable 5 and Mythos 5
for all foreign nationals worldwide,
citing national security concerns. Now
imagine a European company, hospital,
ministry, or public administration that
has built critical processes around a
frontier AI model. From one day to the
next, access disappears. Workflows stop.
Services are disrupted. Teams scramble
to migrate. Millions are spent on energy
replacements. This is what technological
dependence looks like. When access to
critical technologies depends on
decisions taken by foreign governments,
Europe no longer fully controls its
ability to act, compete, or innovate,
writes Harvard's Ben Murphy. This is
another step on the bulcanization of
technology. Malon X writes, "The
scariest part of this whole story is the
dystopia looming on the horizon. It is
the way the US government is literally
creating a cast system based on access
to intelligence. This is even no longer
a divide between rich and poor. It's a
divide between those who are allowed to
think at the frontier level, accelerate
science and medicine, create
breakthrough technologies, and those who
simply happen to be citizens of another
country. This is a new kind of iron
curtain, digital intellectual, and if
they are testing this onanthropic, who
knows who they will come for tomorrow.
Now, I have no idea what happens next.
One has to think that the base case is
that this gets reversed in some way. But
make no mistake, this is an incredibly
dramatic step. I will of course continue
to bring updates as they happen, but for
now, that's going to do it for this
emergency episode of the AI Daily Brief.
Tomorrow, I'll be moving things around a
little bit and releasing the short
weekly recap episode that I've been
experimenting with, and then pushing
what was originally going to be the long
read Sunday episode for sometime in the
next week or so. Big thanks for
listening or watching as always.